Now, any questions?
Question from a yogini: I have a question.
Something that I’m encountering in my life,
and I and this guy who I introduced to Sahaja
and we went together.
He became very frightened after the first
meeting and he became very much against Sahaja
Shri Mataji: Me?
Yogini: Yes, saying that You were bad.
And I, continually I have had great results
with another woman who has experienced.
And he, on the contrary is very much against
it and we were involved a lot with channeling
and a spiritual, you know, man that channels
spirits.
And I seem to think that he is still involved
with that in some way.
I seem to think that is what is holding him
back.
Something is holding him and I don’t know
that if it is my place to help him or just
be a light or … I don’t know what to do.
Shri Mataji: Now to be very frank, no American
is afraid of anything.
Every world is afraid of them.
It’s a wrong idea they have.
It’s very surprising that the people who
give sense of insecurity to everyone always
say, “I’m insecure."
Very surprising.
That’s the way they can just say.
I haven’t met any American who is insecure.
On the contrary they are extremely aggressive
people – very, very aggressive for nothing
at all.
I’ll give an example.
The other day we had gone to one lawyer and
we were waiting for the lift to come down.
When the lift came, such a hefty, tall man,
six foot at least seven inches, very hefty
man was in that.
And we were standing for the lift to come,
we didn’t know there’s somebody inside
there.
As soon as the lift opened, he says, “Who
are you, like a bunch of thugs standing here?”
Can you imagine?
We were amazed.
There was no need.
He had a chance to say something to us, he
just said it.
“So please,” we said.
“It’s all right."
What could you do?
This is the kind of fear they have.
Russians and Americans.
Both are just the same, I would say.
Let them fight it out among themselves.
But to say that an American is frightened
of something, that’s the biggest joke.
They are not frightened.
On the contrary, they always fall into problems
because they go to something which is challenging. I’ll give a [UNCLEAR]
All the false gurus take money from you.
All right.
Now they say, this one, recently somebody
told Me she paid so much money to the gentleman.
He took her into a room all alone.
She’s not frightened!
I mean an Indian woman would be frightened
of a man who takes her into a room alone.
She says, “No, no, no.
You’d better do whatever you like."
She’s not frightened.
She went inside the room.
He said, “Now take out your clothes."
She took out her clothes.
Not frightened.
He said, “Now you sit here, and jump.
Jump, jump, jump!”
She started jumping.
Not afraid that she’ll break her bones or
hands or feet or anything.
Just started jumping.
“Haah!
I feel very fine.
I feel very nice."
What are they afraid of?
Doing stupid things they are not afraid of,
doing nonsensical things they are not afraid
of, but to do sensible things they are.
That’s basically wrong thing.
You know in Brighton we had a nude, a nude
– what do you call that?
– swimming pool.
When it’s such a cold time there.
I don’t know why in a country which is so
cold people want to take out their clothes.
Some sort of – I can’t understand.
I mean in the night we sleep with all our
clothes on in a place like India.
What is the need to take out clothes, I still
don’t understand.
All right.
So, there was a, one swimming pool they started,
a very big venture, you know.
All the television, everything focused and
everybody watching, is for the women and men
who become nude.
What is so great?
Anybody can become.
But, there was an old lady, of My age, walking
into the water.
It’s very cold, you know.
I was wondering, “This woman will get cold
or something like that and pneumonia."
They said, “How do you feel?”
“Oh, I feel very hot."
This stupid woman was feeling hot, you know.
This is what it is.
“What’s wrong?”
To do something stupid, nonsensical they have
no fear.
How is it you think all these gurus have prospered
with all their tricks where people have become
mad, have become lunatics; they’ve lost
their money, sold their children out.
How?
For Sahaja Yoga, they’re frightened.
Why?
You see the point?
See the point?
This is exact is the character.
Such people cannot do Sahaja Yoga.
We have to have people of strength, people
of character, people of dignity.
We can’t have such people who go after this
thing.
Like the other day, one boy came and he asked
Me all stupid questions and he was saying
that, “You see, what about flying in the
air?”
I said, “It’s all right.
But supposing you are suddenly dropped down.
What will you do?”
He’s willing to fly in the air.
Supposing, you see, he has no wings, nothing,
no parachute.
How will he come down?
Even the children understand the joke.
So this is what it is.
To be like a clown, they have no fear at all.
But to be sensible, balanced and dignified,
they’re afraid.
We are not here to ask for elections, are
we?
Sahaja Yoga is difficult – for people who
are stupid, naturally, people who want to
have a life of destruction.
It’s for people who want to evolve, people
who want to become more compassionate, affectionate,
and humble – which is very difficult.
Here the training is, if you are humble, anybody
will trample on you, you’ll be finished,
you’ll be killed.
All right?
You have to be aggressive.
To say an aggressive person is afraid of another
person, then you’d better change the meaning
of the word “aggressive."
I would not say only Americans, even English.
In English language, “I’m afraid."
What are they afraid?
Everybody is afraid of an Englishman.
If he comes in your house, be careful.
He’ll create problem between husband and
wife.
What is there to be afraid?
Afraid of that is Divine, of that is blissful,
that is
such an advantage to you?
Sahaja Yoga is nothing but blessings, blessings,
blessings.
Nothing to sacrifice, nothing to give up,
nothing to sell out.
Even small, small things like children, their
problems, this, that is looked into.
Somebody who cares for you, Somebody who manages
things, Somebody who makes you powerful and
confident and secure.
What is there to be afraid of?
But the brains are upside down.
They are not afraid of a tiger, but afraid
of a cow.
What do you say to such a person?
Say, “What are you afraid of?”
“Afraid of a cow."
“And what you’re not afraid of?”
“Not of a tiger."
“All right.
It’s all right.
Sorry.
I’ll go to some other place."
That’s what you have to say.
I mean, this is what it is: people are just
upside down.
Their value system is upside down.
Example I’ll give you, very simple example,
this Mr.
Hart lost his election because they said he
had some relationship with some woman somewhere.
It’s so common in this country.
What is there that he should lose?
I mean, if he had done something else, like
if he had taken some money of the government
or must have cheated them, then it’s all
right.
But on a point which everybody does!
It would be tomorrow, “Why did you eat a
sausage?
That’s why it lose you."
It’s absurd.
They’re upside down.
Brains are upside down.
See, what is the logic?
So those who say they’re afraid, you say,
“You’re right.
You go and bang your head with something.
That would be better for you."
It’s all stories, I tell you, is the way
they put you down.
There’s nothing to be afraid from a fragrance
of the flower – it’s like that.
There’s … we have a guru who cannot bear
any flowers.
No fragrance.
But if you take the water from the gutters,
he’s very happy.
Now, what do you say to that?
I mean we are not here to please such people,
are we?
You know there’s a guru like that.
He can’t bear … He got how many Rolls
Royces?
Sixty-three Rolls Royces.
And they used to take gutter water for him,
instead of giving flowers.
And there are many Americans who did it, thousands
and thousands and thousands.
Imagine, to buy sixty-three Rolls Royces out
of American money.
What do you say to them?
But they’re afraid to come to Sahaja Yoga.
See?
This is self-deception.
There’s nothing hiding in Sahaja Yoga.
We have to say what one has to say.
We have to face what one has to face.
You should not have any conditionings about
it.
You should not have any ego about it.
Try to understand that this has to be understood:
that we have to be ourselves.
We have to grow.
Whatever is wrong within us has to go away.
But it’s only possible when you become the
Self.
Like, if I have something wrong on My sari,
I can only see it if I have eyes, otherwise
anybody says, “You’re wearing a sari which
is dirty”, I might be angry.
If I’m identified with the sari, I’ll
be angry.
But if I see, “Oh God!
I’d better clean it."
So it’s a vicious circle how to open their
eyes, because to open their eyes is very difficult,
impossible, because they are afraid.
They’re afraid of the light, happy with
the darkness.
Now you cannot please them.
Also, you must know that if you put the whole
American people together and all the Western
people together, we have manifold more people
say in India and other countries who will
become realized souls.
God doesn’t bother from where they come.
If they want to accept such horrible gurus,
let them have it and go with them.
As they say, “Take two running jumps and
go to Hell!”
That’s the attitude of the Divine, I really
tell you.
But not Mine, because I am the Mother so I
have to make the compromise between the nonsensical
people and the Divine, which is nothing but
sense.
There, that is common sense.
So what I have to do is to: “All right.
Doesn’t matter.
Let’s try.
They’ll come along.
They’ll be all right.
They are created by God, that’s why they
are loved."
But not because you are seeking any elections.
You must realize it.
We are not the only human beings living.
We are not the topmost people.
Let’s see where we have gone.
I don’t want to condemn anyone as such,
because they are all My children, but I would
like you to see where are we.
We must understand, we are getting destroyed,
our children are getting destroyed, our society
is getting destroyed, the whole thing is getting
destroyed.
Where are we?
What’s the use of calling ourselves great?
Now AIDS, you’ll be surprised, there’s
a war on AIDS – what is the war on AIDS?
Once upon a time, you see, these tourists
used to bring their clothes and their, what
you call, sleeping bags and everything, and
sell them in the border of Nepal.
My daughter lives there.
Once they got the news of AIDS, not that they
don’t purchase this, but they’ve thrown
everything, whatever they had in the house
and burnt it up.
This is the situation.
Nobody wants to kiss an American these days,
to be very frank.
I’ve been warned.
That’s what you are.
That’s what we are going.
Let’s see where are we going, relatively.
But we think still we are great.
Then who can help you?
You are just holding on now to something.
Any moment you’ll fall down.
Supposing that is the situation, then try
to understand you are in a difficult situation.
I want to warn you again, just like Vishnumaya,
be – not only that you should understand,
but be in possession of this understanding
that we have to save others.
If they are afraid, tell them, “What are
you afraid of, stupid fellow?
Come along."
They like it, I tell you.
“But I am afraid …”
Then you also very sophisticatedly say, “Oh,
I am sorry you are afraid.
What are you afraid of?”
All right?
That’s how it will work.
Otherwise it is not going to work out.
I’ve tried all tricks.
Nothing works out unless you tell them, “Better
join Sahaja Yoga otherwise you’ll be destroyed
tomorrow.
You’ll get cancer, you’ll get AIDS, you’ll
get this.
If you want to save yourself, come to Sahaja
Yoga."
That’s what they understand, and that’s
what the gurus do to them.
“If you do not jump, I’ll throw you out
of the room."
So they start jumping.
It’s a fact.
Till they break their bones, they jump.
So you should know that you’re Sahaja Yogis
and that you are building up a new society
of people who can save others.
For that you have to know how far people have
gone, how you have to pull them out, how you
have to work it out.
Any style of compromise, any style of explanation,
discussion – try everything, because after
all, I don’t want them to be destroyed.
But don’t think what they say has any sense
in it.
You must have a higher understanding than
they are because you know that they are catching
on the Agnya and they are afraid.
All right?
Some of them do say – I’ve heard – that,
“Supposing we get transformed, then we cannot
enjoy the life of every day life."
What are you enjoying?
On the road you are walking, when I came in
Los Angeles, they told Me, “Mother, do You
know, serious things have happened."
I said, “What serious things?”
“On this road three people were killed last
week."
I said, “How?”
“Just they shot."
“What’s so great about us?”, you should
ask.
“Aren’t you worried about this may happen
to you – to happen to your children?
They’ll be killed.
Anybody can kill you.
What are you doing about it?”
Talk like that as if you understand the problem.
You express your concern, your heartfelt concern.
Definitely they will understand.
Because they told Me that “In Sahaja Yoga
it’s very bad because we’ll be transformed
and then we’ll not enjoy."
So this is what you’re enjoying on the street
– go ahead.
Enjoy the fear, the scariness of it.
You can’t make your children play in the
front door.
That’s what you’re enjoying?
They enjoy, if they’re stupid they say,
“We … this is our fundamental right to
be stupid."
But you have a fundamental right to enjoy
joy, to meet joy.
Have you met joy?
That’s your fundamental right: to be the
Spirit.
Have you become the Spirit?
It’s fundamental right – what sort of
a fundamental right it is to be stupid?
And they say it openly, shamelessly, without
any respect of yourself.
They have no respect of themselves, so they
have to first have their own respect.
For that, they have to understand that they’re
human beings at the epitome of evolution.
They don’t have to become worms now anymore.
All this you can talk to them the way I’m
talking to you, all of you, and tell them,
“See, now this is what it is.
What is happening?
What are we doing about it?”
All right?
Even then if they say so, all right.
Don’t waste your energy.
We have to work it out together.
Try any tricks that are possible; you are
permitted.
But in Sahaj Yoga there’s no need to tell
lies, no need to do any harm, to torture someone.
There’s no need at all.
But better bring to their understanding, in
their vision, what is going to happen to the
country.
That’s your job as Sahaj Yogis.
I don’t want anything from you, as you know.
But, you have to understand that Mother has
given us realization, that we have become
Sahaj Yogis – for what?
We have become Sahaja Yogis to be the light,
to show them the light, show them the darkness,
show them the way they will fall down and
will be destroyed.
That’s our job.
All right?
May God bless you.
Any other question, please?
Question from a Yogi: I was wondering if You
could talk about what we could do to form
a school for our children here in America.
Many of us now with small children [???????]
Shri Mataji: That has been My primal problem
here.
I know, it’s terrible, I know!
You see it’s going to be very difficult
for you to have your children sent to these
schools because the atmosphere is so bad.
For the time being I only feel that you must
develop your children in such a manner that
they become strong, self-confident, and also
they have good examples before them, as you
people are – to begin with.
And you will find many Indian families are
here, but what I have seen is that the children
of at least sixty percent of Indian families
don’t learn bad things, normally.
This is My own experience.
The reason is because the Indian family people
are all the time talking to their children,
having a nice family meetings together, taking
them out, telling them about good things,
of sharing; because those people who are here
from India have had that kind of a training,
so they are trying to train their children
in the same way.
Now the families which are so-called “advanced”
here can beat you hollow in nonsensical things.
Because when it comes to advancement, they
don’t know how to relate it to anything
else.
But those who are not that way, those who
have been going through a lifestyle, still
maintain their own ideas and their own behavior,
their own principles.
They are imbibed by children, and they just
think, “These are another category of people;
these are not our style, these are different."
They don’t change.
I’ve seen many families like that.
In the same way, first of all you must pay
full attention to your children, talk to them,
bring them up in such a manner that they have
another value system.
I mean, I can say about My own daughters or
grandchildren, you put them anywhere in the
world, they will never become like others,
because they have their roots.
So you must try to make their roots very strong
into great principles.
Then they won’t be that much in difficulty.
Like as I was discussing today … people
that … see the … as I said that Indian
society has built up itself in traditional
… now ages it has built in traditions and
things.
So it must have made mistakes, trial and error
and all that.
But it has reached certain really some very
fine points.
One thing about children in India, say, we
don’t tell them, “Don’t touch this!
Don’t take this!
Don’t open this!”
Never.
We also don’t allow them just to behave
like a bull in a china shop.
Supposing now I want to have a Diet Coke.
All right?
So I tell a child, “All right, go and get
one tin of Diet.
Now bring this glass.
Slowly, because it is very good, so beautiful,
you have to use it very carefully.
Now keep it there.
Now open the can.
Put it in there.
Now you have bring it and give it to a friend
or anyone."
So the child carries it very carefully.
But supposing it falls down, doesn’t matter!
He’ll have another one.
So the child develops the deftness of handling
it, the respect for it, and not the sort of
a fear of it.
The cooking, same way.
Today there was a big complaint about the
way people cook here.
And in the discussion then I reached a conclusion
that the mother cooks that way.
So what mothers says, all right, she … the
child doesn’t sit in the TV room if mother
is cooking, in Indian homes.
Is the child is in the TV room?
No, is with the mother.
The mother says, “All right.
Now what you do, we’ll cut some vegetables.
I’m cutting.
Now you’d better do it.
Now whatever is left out, which is not to
be used for cooking, we’ll have to put it
in this thing.
Now, this has to go into the wastepaper basket."
And Indian kitchen is all the time clean,
spic and span, every minute.
Every room is spic and span.
House.
Outside, what can we do?
It’s the government, the management nonsense.
I mean the people here think they’re very
clean; I think they are not, only the government
is.
The clothes are hanging here – this, that.
In Indian homes, even in the poorest of poor
you go, everything looks spic and span, clean.
Because the child is told to keep it.
Now the child has, say, a paper in his hand.
He won’t throw it everywhere.
Carry it, take it to the … How?
because the mother will say, “All right,
now this paper is here.
Where should it go?”
All the time the mother and the child are
together, or the father.
All the time.
Wherever.
It’s not that the children can’t go to
this place.
Here the beginning itself is wrong.
When the little child is born, you put him
in another room and the parents are sleeping
in another room.
It’s the worse thing that you can do to
a little baby.
That’s how the child will become very insecure,
unhappy, abnormal.
In the subconscious, the child will have a
very funny feelings.
After marriage, after having children the
parents have to accept parenthood.
They are still in the bridal dresses, or the
men are still thinking they are romantic heroes
going around.
You are parents now!
Otherwise don’t produce children.
If you produce children, be parents.
That doesn’t mean you should become absolutely
boring type people.
But, take interest in your children; keep
them with you all the time; talk to them;
tell them how to behave.
I mean the behavior here of children is abnormally
funny I find.
For that, one has to blame the training.
And all the freedom is to be given to children.
Now the carpet is more important than child;
a door is more important, wall is more important
than the child.
Then what happens, when the children grow
up I’ve seen, when they go to somebody’s
house they start using everything as if their
own.
In their house they are very comfortably seated.
And also every way you have restrictions on
children, which sometimes shocks.
Like I’ll tell you the example of My own
granddaughter, she was telling Me that “Naani,
I’d invited some girls for my birthday party.
And you know they liked it very much.
And she asked me, ‘Can I have some more?’
I was surprised.
It was all Mummy had made for them, and she
had such a lot inside, and she was enjoying,
they were eating.
So they came and asked, ‘Can I have for
some more?’
They’re not beggars; they are children.
They should rule all their wants.
They should ask for.
But then you’ll get some toys, put them,
the toy is with the child.
The child doesn’t know the parents.
Toys, fill it up with the toys.
Then by the time you go in the garage, there’s
no place.
All the toys are kept there, you see.
So the whole training system is wrong.
You must take your child with you.
You must take him out.
You must show everything.
Who else is going to teach them?
I see a mother who is, say, a person who has
done, say, M.A.
in Botany, and the child doesn’t know what
is a leaf and what is a flower.
Involve them with yourself.
You go to work, tell them what happened, “You
know, today this thing happened in the work,
this is what."
They are something separate from you.
How can they grow?
At this time, they depend on you for all their
nourishment.
Every time.
And in that you have to teach them how to
share things.
But I think very little time is spent with
children, which should be much more – much,
much more.
Continuously it should be.
I mean even My girls who are – one is forty
years of age, even now she comes and sleeps
with Me in the morning time.
She must hug Me, sleep with Me; and when I
come, she cries like a little baby, what to
do?
I did the same with My mother.
But I knew everything about My mother, and
I knew so many things that she liked and what
she didn’t like and what should not be done.
And there’s such an attachment to the mother
comes in, and father.
You don’t want to lose that love.
Once My daughter asked Me, when she was in
college, “I want to wear sleeveless blouses."
I said, “Go ahead.
No harm”
She said, “But why don’t You wear?”
I said, “I feel shy.
I feel shy to expose My arms."
Then she said immediately, “Then this is
no criteria – because I’ve asked You,
You should say ‘yes’ to me?
No, that’s not good."
She, herself, corrected herself.
So first a complete integration of the children
with yourself.
Now, the films – they have films for children,
for adolescents then I don’t know what else
is there.
No, all the films should be for everyone.
But if you have to show filthy stuff, then
you have to have it after twelve o’clock
in the night.
Why to see filthy stuff?
Whatever you’re children cannot see, why
should you see?
It’s not something very mature, is it, that
you want to see and the children can’t see.
So the whole shifting starts, like a mother
is seeing the very mature thing is about God,
is about some great Incarnation, of some philosophy.
Children are also sitting.
And they start asking, “What is collective
consciousness?” at a very young age.
“What is Chaitanya?
What is Omkara?”
The whole attention moves to something else.
Otherwise you show them the thing for the
children in that they show you this doll coming
today, that doll.
“Mommy, I must have that doll!”
Get them the doll and be finished with them.
That’s wonderful.
Bring their attention out of all these things.
See these all medias, everything, are working
on your children morning till evening.
Now they have a doll in America which even
have a birth date.
And then you have to join a club, and for
that club you have to pay so much, so much
dollars.
Then you become a member of that, and they
write to you, “What is the name for the
child and when was she christened, and this
and that."
They are playing upon your children.
And you are happy as long as children don’t
trouble you, and when they trouble you in
England – I don’t know in America what
do they do – they kill their children.
Then the children kill them.
Whole thing is upside down.
India it might happen if they become developed
and advanced.
So we are different people; we come out of
it.
Now let’s start another way.
Let’s not identify ourselves with that nonsense.
Let’s be something extraordinary.
Let’s make our children something different.
That’s what is to be given to your children,
not money, wealth, toys.
No!
Personality.
Roots.
You are their roots.
If you are shifty like this, how do you expect
your children to be all right?
You have to nourish them.
All right?
So first of all, the education of the child
starts with the father, mother and the family
– and the respect for elders.
Supposing your father is there, your mother
is in the house, and if you will ill treat
your parents, they will ill treat you, naturally.
There is a very interesting story: There was
an old lady and she had a father-in-law who
was very old, and the son always used to carry
his broth in a bowl made of ordinary clay.
And she used to treat him like a dog, the
daughter-in-law.
One day that broke, and this boy fell down
and it broke and he started crying.
So the mother thought he’s very badly hurt
the way he was crying.
He said, “No, I am not hurt, but this thing
is broken."
“So why are you crying for that?
We can get another one."
“Sure you can get another one?”
She said, “Yes."
“You know because I was worried how will
I give you food when you will be old.
That’s what I was worried, that when I have
to send you food, how will I manage?”
Then she understood.
How you treat others, how you behave towards
others, how you live neatly, clean ways and
things – that’s what children learn.
Greatest thing, more than precepts, are practices.
Here the husband, wife will quarrel in the
presence of children, beat each other.
Can you imagine?
I’ve seen that.
I mean if you see any film these days, it’s
the quarrel between husband and wife – put
this way, that way, that way, this way, this
way, that way.
That’s all, get fed up with it.
No respect, no love, no affection.
Or some sort of a destruction.
Then the children, themselves, don’t want
to see any picture.
You see, when My daughters were small, I would
only take them to religious picture like Shri
Rama’s life, this, that, and all that.
So they developed a taste for that.
So when they went home to My mother’s place
they said, “We will not go to this picture.
If there is any Ramas, Hanumanas, then we’ll
go."
So My sister said, “You see, first of all
we can’t leave them alone in the house.
You can’t take them to any picture, they
don’t like any other picture but that of
God’s pictures.
So, I mean there are not so many, so what
to do?”
I said, “All right, why don’t you also
see with them the same?”
She said, “But there are some nice social
pictures, but they don’t like it."
So what sort of books you give them, what
sort of things you talk to them – always
be with them, keep them with you.
That’s the best.
Or even if they have to go to some school,
it should be a school where there’s love,
affection, good company, they talk of Sahaj
Yoga, sort of a thing.
I wish you could start a school of Sahaja
Yoga in America.
But you know how difficult it is to start
anything sensible?
Everybody is afraid.
But if you want to start a school of nonsensical
things, they’ll give you grants.
It’s very difficult, even in England – same
thing, can’t start a school.
If you want to start some sort of a disco,
it’s very easy.
Many schools are closing down in England.
Actually, there was a school for sale.
I wanted to buy in My own simple ideas.
They said, “Mother, first think why it is
closed."
I said, “Why?”
“Because of the different rules and regulations,
it is closed."
I said, “Then, you’re great grandchildren
might be able to go to that school.
It will take so much time."
So first thing I’ll say, you should look
after your children.
Tell them when it is wrong, you must tell
them, “This is wrong, it should not be done."
Like your child doesn’t respect others,
you must tell them.
If he doesn’t do, if he spoils something
or does something wrong to others, then you
must tell him.
If he doesn’t share things, you must tell,
“You must share your doll.
You must share this."
But when it comes to correcting him for nonsensical
things, you should not.
You’ll see, it will change.
Then later on, of course, we have to think
of school and all that, trying to do something.
Let’s work it out, maybe, then we’ll take
over.
Basically they should be all right.
Otherwise, they come to India and slap all
the teachers.
What’s the use?
It’s not easy.
Western children are not easy, you know, to
manage.
Actually, then definitely they’ll be frightened
of western children coming to India – rather
difficult.
Because you must discipline them.
And the main thing is, they should like the
discipline, they should want the discipline.
That’s how you should be.
This stupid idea of freedom, means license,
should go out.
They should like it.
I remember My parents, the way they disciplined
us, we would like it.
Any child would remember that, “Oh my father,
very particular."
But here they’ll call a twelve-year-old
son – I know a friend of ours, such a shocking
story!
The lady come to -friend means in the official
way.
She came to London and she said, “Have you
seen the pubs?”
I said, “No."
“Wonderful, interesting pubs in London."
I said, “Really?”
She had a list of them.
She said, “The best is this one."
I said, “What is so special?”
“It’s called as the Hermit’s Pub."
“So what is great?”
“You see, a man died in this place, and
people did not know for months together.
Then the smell started coming out, so they
came in, took him away and buried him.
But all the cobwebs and all the smell is still
retained.
And that’s the most expensive pub in London."
I said, “Oh God.
What’s this going on?”
This lady said, “You know, we are very free
with our children.
We allow them to do what they like."
And she had two sons, I think – one was
twelve-year-old and one was eleven-year-old.
And these husband, wife were sleeping upstairs,
in America.
These two children were having a party, and
the father had given them alcohol, beer, all
open drink.
“Oh, enjoy, we are one!”
And these children of that age group started
drinking, and then I don’t know what happened
to them, they put fire to some alcohol and
the whole house was burnt.
One child ran out, eleven-year-old.
The mother, father, one son all died and so
many children.
This is no freedom.
You have to teach your children discretion;
you have to teach them.
This is what one has to learn.
So I think before starting a school for children,
let us start a school for parents.
What do you say?
All right.
What is next?
Ursula: Shri Mataji, You had suggested that
we can try many tricks, or different tricks
for approaching seekers to find our brothers
and sisters.
And in Australia, when someone has …
Shri Mataji: No, no, no.
I can’t hear you.
Just come here.
Yes, Ursula.
What is it?
Ursula: You had suggested that we could try
many tricks to find our brothers and sisters,
and different ways and approaches.
And in Australia, each idea seems to be … they’re
so enthusiastic and they, they support the
idea.
And this is, I don’t know if it’s just
my feeling, but there’s a feeling here that
when there’s a suggestion or an idea we’re
very “Oh, no."
One person may say, “Yes, good idea."
Another person may say “No, no."
And then you don’t want to do anything wrong,
so you just don’t do anything, you just
wait.
And then nothing happens.
Shri Mataji: Among Sahaj Yogis, you mean to
say?
Ursula: Among Sahaj Yogis.
Shri Mataji: See, it comes from the individualistic
attitude about ourselves.
I mean anything you tell them, they cannot
live collectively, that we know in the West.
I know what I have to go through when we have
to organize their programs with three hundred
people coming, this and that.
But … this individualism is so much, like
every bathroom has a different tap.
You’d better ask somebody, otherwise you’ll
land up into difficulties.
Even the ties have to be different; everything
has to be different.
Now, if there’s something fundamental, then
you can ask your leader.
But if it is something mundane, all right.
You want blue color?
I have blue.
You want red?
Have red.
Like that you can solve your problem.
If it is something fundamental, then you should
ask your leader.
But if it is something which is not fundamental,
which is very simple, let them have their
own way, then gradually they’ll grow into
it.
Because this is the basic problem of this
country is.
So-called individualism makes them feel that,
“Oh, this mine.
I’ll do it the way I like."
Now say a motor car has a different handle.
Now a person who’s sitting inside must know
what sort of a handle it is.
Tomorrow something happens, you can’t even
open it.
Otherwise, they’re not at all individualistic,
I’ll tell you how.
Like in India, supposing I’m wearing this
sari.
Maybe there’s another sari like that.
If another lady’s wearing the same sari,
she’ll go and change and come back.
She won’t wear the same sari.
But, here when fashion, if somebody’s … now
that our Princess of Wales has this kind of
a hairstyle, all English girl’s have the
same hairstyle.
You don’t know from one to another.
So what is so individual about them?
If some fashion starts, now this is the fashion,
very fashionable.
What is fashionable?
Is to cut your hair this way and make a punk.
So everybody is a punk.
Suddenly you find Sahaja Yogis walking as
punks, you want to know who is who.
So what is the individual character there?
Where is the individuality?
On principles you should be individuals – on
principles, and not on artificial things.
Now this one has a principle.
Supposing I’m wearing this sari.
It’s made by hand, it’s one designed by
one person.
So I’m giving importance to one person.
Now he might have made two or three or four
at the most.
Now if somebody repeats the same sari, that
means I have not encouraged that man so much.
Like you can have the same sari made out of
a, say, machine.
Then you’ll start, “All right have ten
saris like this, twenty saris like this, all
made by machines."
But here, because we want to have a sari separate,
it has to be made with hand.
In principle, see?
How it helps!
This is what it is.
In principle you should be collective; in
principle you should be individualistic.
In Sahaja Yoga we don’t want you dressed
up the same way.
I mean I don’t want Americans to go about
like something Chinese.
Let us have our own dress, dress up the way
we like, everything.
That’s all right.
It’s nothing important.
But in principle, we have to be the same.
One principle nourishes the tree – the sap.
It has many flowers, fruits.
It has many leaves, it’s all right – outside.
So in principle you have to be collective.
All right?
For mundane things, why to fight?
But in any case, somebody who is an elder,
who knows better, who’s wiser – listen
to that person.
We always have an awe, and a respect for elders.
Like I see, thank God, you have now Sherayu,
supposing – take one case, individual case.
She’s come all the way from India, now she’s
staying.
She knows quite a lot about pujas, things
like that.
She knows how to do many things.
You should be prepared to know from her.
Otherwise sometimes it’s very embarrassing
the way things happen.
Now she’s here, she can teach you.
There’s nothing wrong in learning.
She has learned many things from you.
But there’s no respect, I think sometimes,
for her, at all.
She’s an auntie somewhere sitting on the
shelf.
No, she’s here for a purpose, one should
learn, respect.
But that doesn’t mean you be her slave or
anything, but you gain something out of her.
Another person who comes here should learn.
Like from Americans, we have to learn a lot.
Tell Me what.
Yogini: I don’t think we’re doing much
about communication.
Shri Mataji: The communication is not there
because of individualism.
But, that’s not so.
There’s no individualism at all, because
I’ve seen, once the fashion starts, everybody
looks the same.
The other day I came, I saw ladies looking
like men with muscles like this, walking like
that.
I said, “What sort of creature is this?”
One came, two came, three came, five came,
ten came.
“What’s this going on?”
I didn’t understand.
They are all walking like that, like Draculas.
I said, “What is this?”
“Oh, this is fashionable."
What is fashionable?
“They’re developing their muscles."
What’s the principle?
(continued on second cassette)
That’s it.
So, in such things we do not argue.
Means in stupidity we don’t argue, but in
sensible things we argue.
In sensible things – we have to understand
what is sensible.
After all, we are realized souls; we are not
like other people.
We must understand what is good.
When I say something, you agree.
I don’t know how.
You like it.
I may say something also which may not be
so palatable, but you like it.
See, think must have it, it’s a medicine.
In the same way, one should see to things
which you may not like so much, because maybe
you’re conditioned, but see to the sense
of it, the common sense, the balance.
You can understand, and you have something
very great called vibrations.
But even that also, I have seen, horrible
things they do.
Some people went – husband, wife – went
to stay with some lady because her husband
had gone to India.
Threw all her furniture out, all her carpets
out, everything out.
I said, “Why did you do it?”
“Very bad vibrations."
I said, “Really?
Now will you please pay for all that – for
the bad vibrations."
I mean anybody else’s things, who are you
to decide good or bad vibrations?
You look after your own vibrations.
So they also sometimes use the vibrations
just to, sort of, express their ego.
So let us try on ourselves, everyone, “Am
I doing it just for ego’s sake?
Am I quarreling because of ego?
Am I saying ‘no’ for ego?”
As far as possible, try to concede.
You’ll feel much better.
You’ll learn much more.
I mean, I’ve learned so many things since
I’ve been abroad, I mean, I didn’t know
so many things.
I don’t know even now.
For example, I didn’t know how to operate
a TV.
Even now, I don’t know much about it.
Really.
I didn’t know how to operate a telephone
of a particular type.
So, I had to learn.
I had to learn how to book a ticket, which
I don’t do even now, but still I have to
learn.
So many things I have to learn, and whatever
I can learn I would like to learn.
Cooking I know, but I never knew how to wash
utensils because in India they, I mean normally
you have servants.
But I learned it – your style with fairy
liquid.
I had to learn.
There’s nothing wrong in it.
So one must try to learn, than to argue.
Ursula: In Australia, the enthusiasm and the
joy that they have!
And if someone has an idea for something,
there’s just so much support for that, that
they all go out to help each other.
It becomes a very big, collective effort.
Shri Mataji: But Australia, Australians are
very wise people.
They understand wisdom.
That’s what we have to be – wise, very
wise.
And if any Indian is there, they try to ask,
“how do you do?”
Particular things, on principle as a puja
things, they’ll ask an Indian.
But booking the seats, never ask Indians.
They’re no good.
Cooking, kitchen, cleaning – very good.
Maintaining house – all right.
Looking after children – all right.
But driving a car, an Indian?
Save Me.
I would never sit in a car which is driven
by an Indian in America.
Because crazy the way people drive.
You know this fellow won’t know how to do
it.
So it is just wisdom and discretion one has
to use, and not to fight.
It happens, I’m happy, I’ve seen this
in Australians.
They were declared as people of – people
who were criminals, the children of criminals.
They are so sensible.
Discretion must be used, that’s important.
It’s sad.
But it will be all right, I’m sure one day.
Never argue on things which doesn’t involve
any principle.
It’s the best way; it’s the happiest.
Even now, you see today it was so warm.
I wanted to wear a cotton sari, you see.
But My children said, “No, must wear this
one."
I said, “Wore it."
I was perspiring, this, that.
All right, doesn’t matter, what’s the
difference, perspire for a while.
Came out with this sari.
They liked it, so it’s all right to please
them.
Nothing, no principle is involved in it.
When you think about others, then you will
get rid of this problem.
But so many people try to preach also Sahaja
Yoga to others.
They should not.
It’s a very serious thing, they will start
teaching.
It need not be taught that way – then people
don’t like it.
But your own behavior, in your own character,
in your own responses, people should see “this
person is like this."
And they should imbibe it.
That’s the point, I think what we lack is
discretion.
If you are discrete, you will learn very fast,
it’s not difficult.
Ursula: We still can be very judgmental of
newcomers.
If they have particular problems, we get all
… it’s hard.
Shri Mataji: The newcomers.
Agreed.
With the newcomers, you should not be harsh
with them.
You should be kind, you should try to understand
this thing.
But, you know still, I tell you sometimes
… The other day I had some boy who had come,
all right?
He asked Me at least twenty questions.
I answered them properly – this thing, that
thing.
And he got so pampered, he sent Me news, “I
don’t want to become Sahaja Yogi."
I mean, but for Me, anybody would box his
nose, for such an answer.
You see, you have to take it in a stride.
Situation is so bad; situation is very bad.
Must understand we are on a warpath, whatever
is possible, we can do it.
But every country has improved so much.
So what’s wrong here is: people don’t
want to learn; people don’t want to understand
the sacrifice of giving up your ego, giving
up your decisions.
“All right, let’s see, let’s see."
Like that.
That’s why it doesn’t grow.
Now one thing I must say, in America if you
have My program, hall will be full, I won’t
be able to enter in, and when I get out, I’ll
be pushed out like a piston.
I’ve seen it.
It’s the people are so much I don’t know
how to get in and how get out.
It’s terrible!
And when I go away, they just disappear.
Because, there’s something lacking – of
course, I agree – among Sahaj Yogis, that
we have to see.
After all, nothing special about Me as such,
I mean, they just see My photograph and come
to the programs and sit down there.
Even if I have three days program, it goes
on increasing.
While there are Sahaj Yogis who may not even
be able to have one person in the hall.
What’s the reason?
They don’t know Me.
All right?
So there’s something lacking in us, also,
when the newcomers come in, how we treat them,
we talk to them, how we appeal to them.
Once in awhile of course there will be somebody
who will rude.
Doesn’t matter.
But try to be nice to them.
On the whole I think the newcomers – I won’t
tell all these things to a newcomer if he
comes.
If a newcomer come I say, “Oh, very nice.
How are you?
This, that."
You see?
Settle him down.
Any other fundamental differences you find,
you can ask Me – fundamental.
Yogi: I’m just little curious about, well,
future little bit.
Are You going to manifest Yourself in some
different way as Shri Kalki?
Or are You going to sort of let the change
happen a little more gradually?
Shri Mataji: Direct questions.
You tell Me, what should I do?
Tell Me, what should I do?
Any other form won’t be suitable.
Try any other form.
Take Shri Krishna’s form, You have to take
the Sudarshana and just kill off all those
who don’t believe in Sahaja Yoga.
Is it all right?
Take form of Jesus Christ.
Hang Yourself nicely, finish with everyone.
Then think of Kalki.
Finish everything.
After doing all this work, beautifully creating
all this world so beautifully, don’t you
think One should manage it, try to manage
it, as far as possible?
That’s My style.
Which one would you prefer?
(Laughter from the yogis)
Shri Mataji: What did he say?
Voice from the crowd: He likes Your style,
Mother.
Shri Mataji: Aha!
That’s it.
You see that’s what – nothing else.
Of course you should know that Kalki’s acting,
everybody’s acting, everybody’s acting
but is on a low key, as they say.
One has to be very careful; it’s a very
delicate job.
So many are lost.
These gurus have taken over so many.
It’s a very, very delicate job.
All right?
But if necessary, I can do something.
Now, any other question?
What time is your dinner?
Any other question?
Yogi: Mother, it seems that many of us here
don’t really know about the Hamsa Chakra,
in terms of understanding how it relates to
the Vishuddhi and what we can do to strengthen
our Vishuddhi.
Shri Mataji: Hamsa Chakra stands between Vishuddhi
and Agnya as you can see clearly positioned
like that.
But from Vishuddhi there are many nerves which
pass through Hamsas and end up here.
They don’t all go to the brain.
Or we can say that at this time, at this point,
all our reactions which are what you call
reflex reactions finish off.
So supposing now I get some dirty smell, I’ll
close My nose like that, or if I can’t hear,
I’ll just pull My ears like this; or if
I see something dirty, or if I see something
jarring, My eyes will close automatically.
If somebody tries to put a pin through Me,
immediately I’ll … spontaneously, it’s
all built in, within My system, and your system,
too, that you react with reflex action.
Same thing may not happen to animals.
Animals are different.
Some animals have certain reflex actions,
some have some reflex actions; but we are
different and our reflex actions we are all
practically just the same.
There’s not much individuality.
There isn’t much difference in our reflex
actions.
At the most, with conditioning somebody might
say “Yah!”, somebody might say “Oh!”,
somebody might say something – that’s
different.
But the reflex actions are just the same.
So up to the reflex action, we don’t have
to use discretion.
Then starts our discretion part.
Discretion starts when we are using these
two nadis which meet here, without going to
the Agnya.
So when these two nadis meet here, what happens
we start seeing through our experiences.
First would be a reflex action, automatic
reflex action.
The second is when, supposing a child, if
you tell the child, “Now this is hot; don’t
put your hand there”, he won’t listen.
Put the child.
With experience, he will develop reflex actions,
the conditionings of it.
So thus reflexes are built in within us.
Also, they are built in within us with, we
should say, with other conditionings like,
you see, in a country supposing there’s
racialism, or in a country like ours there’s
a caste system.
Then person react according to what they have
learned from childhood.
All these conditionings could be of the present
day, when you are born.
You could have been, yourself, born in last
life in, say, Africa.
Today you are born with a white skin, so you
have started sort of calling that African
you have become.
All these conditionings can be built in, into
your Hamsa Chakra, which have come from your
training of the mind, you can say the experiences
of the mind, the experiences of the society,
of your knowledge, of your education, the
way you’re conditioned can be built in here
– in the Hamsa Chakra.
And it reacts to things which has no meaning.
If you were … “I hate someone!”
Why?
Because that person wears a blue jean, or
something; or you can say a green shirt.
Now this is built in your mind.
Or sometimes this falling in love, also, comes
from the same kind of a conditioning.
Supposing you had met somebody who had, say,
blue eyes and was kind to you.
So you have fascination for a person who has
blue eyes.
There’s no pure idea about beauty; there’s
no pure idea of happiness; there’s no pure
idea of esthetics.
All is condition.
For some people, this is beautiful; for somebody,
this is not beautiful.
So this is the place where these interchanges
take place between both the nadis, and here
the Hamsa lies outside the path of Kundalini.
They sort of come out here, out of the path
of Kundalini.
It’s very surprising.
When the Kundalini moves, She goes from Vishuddhi
direct to Agnya.
Now, how can we improve our Hamsa then?
It’s a big problem, because if our Hamsa
is sick, is over-conditioned.
The Kundalini cannot work on it; it just gives
up.
Now, so for Hamsa we use all these physical
things.
Like I said, put the ghee in the nose.
Keep it in a way that it is nourished properly.
Because Kundalini, if it tries to too much
attack the Hamsa, it will have problem.
Problem because, as it is most of our time
we spend in such a manner that your Hamsa
things become – what you call the epithelial
cells, the linings – become dried out.
When the Kundalini rises, She may try to create
a problem more for that dryness – maybe.
So it is kept out, but it has an effect in
the sense that even if there is a light outside,
it can fall inside.
So it’s not the Kundalini directly that
affects your Hamsa.
It is like when the Kundalini awakens, you
yourself see now that a person is, whether
he is fair complexion or dark complexion,
he is a human being.
You reason it out and Hamsa clears up.
Then you see yourself that, “Oh, I’m very
egoistical."
You start seeing yourself through your Agnya,
start seeing that, “I’m so conditioned."
So you reason it out, and that’s how you
correct your conditionings.
This is what is Hamsa Chakra.
So Hamsa Chakra cannot be done if just you’re
a realized soul, but is an effect, is the
symptom of your Kundalini awakening.
Some people think that you develop discretion
just as the Kundalini rises.
Is a wrong idea.
No.
That has to be deliberately seen that you
build up that discretion within yourself.
But once it is built – for example My discretion
is absolute, I just know what it is.
You see My conditioning here is absolute,
is one with the Kundalini, one with reality.
But for human beings, it has to be reflected
by understanding.
Like a child who touches something hot, then
it is hot.
Now this is hot, because it’s heated up.
So you see a person is catching on the right
heart.
Right.
He’s catching on the right heart means he’s
got a right heart, and he is suffering from
such and such thing.
You have to see it yourself.
Now if you tell the person, “Are you suffering
from, say, asthma?”
He says, “Yes, how do you know?”
“I know it because I’ve learned it through
my finger which was burning, that’s why
I know it is."
But supposing somebody has an asthma and in
that plays the part your Kundalini, you will
get asthma immediately.
You see the point?
The conditioning cannot come to us unless
and until it passes through, or sieves through,
our reasoning and understanding.
Are you understand the point?
It cannot work.
The reason is, it filters your collective
consciousness.
Otherwise, you go near a person who has AIDS,
and you become collectively conscious that
he has AIDS.
And if you imbibe all that into you as a conditioning,
you will get it.
But you are separated.
Like person who reads a – there’s a very
nice story about this, Jerome has written.
Like one man, he went and read Materia Medica.
Went and told doctor that, “Doctor I have
all the diseases except for one, which is
housewife’s knee.
He said, “How is it you haven’t got it?”
“Because I am not a housewife."
So he got conditioned into all the diseases.
That’s how many people get diseases, but
thank God there’s a filter.
If somebody has a disease, you don’t get
it, because you can filter it.
But Hamsa Chakra could be affected by baddhas.
That’s one problem, if some baddha passes
through the nose, you might; some viruses
pass through the nose, you might.
Affected, means it can get sick.
But one must understand the discrimination
between the two.
Say there’s a virus infection outside.
It can pass into your Hamsa Chakra and can
give you a problem of sinus, this, that – physical.
But you won’t become like a person who has
given you virus infection.
So there is a filter.
But supposing there’s a person who is very
hectic.
And you come in contact with that person – he’s
very hectic, so your Swadisthana can take
over.
You can become hectic with that person.
Being with that person, you can become hectic.
But as far as the Hamsa is concerned, with
anybody you live, your Hamsa doesn’t carry
the complete impact of that because there’s
filter.
So now, if you have to develop the discretion,
you have to learn, you have to understand.
It doesn’t come automatically.
But with children who are born realized, their
Hamsa is so developed that they know it – what
is right, what is wrong.
Because their Hamsa is so much trained that
way, they don’t have to use much understanding.
But those who are now growing up, have become
now Sahaja Yogis have to know through their
own experiences their Hamsa.
It’s a filter, also.
But for a child, he knows what is right, what
is wrong, because his Hamsa is developed.
In India, when the child is born he’s massaged
nicely.
Oiling is the best way to have a good Hamsa.
Oil his hair, oil his body, put some drops
in the nose, everything.
They try in the ear, in the nose and that’s
how they build up.
So what I have to say that physically you
should help your Hamsa Chakra by using ghee
and all that, and mentally you should use
it by learning things, in experience – what
to do, how to do it, how to work it out, how
to establish.
That is how Hamsa Chakra grows and makes you
discrete.
That’s why tradition is very important.
Tradition gives you the growth of the Hamsa
Chakra and then you go on discarding whatever
is wrong out of that tradition.
Then again, you keep whatever is good.
Give it to your children, to your children,
to your children.
So the discretion comes to a person who is
traditionally built up better than a person
who has no traditions.
Now, for example, this morning I was discussing
that people take, fill the wash basin and
wash their face, in the West.
In India, we cannot conceive of it, cannot
even think of it.
I mean, people don’t know it can be done.
Because in traditional way it has come out
that if you’re washing your face and again
the water goes into there, then all the dirt
is in it, again you’re using the same water.
So you cannot have completed.
So always use running water.
Traditionally we’ve learned it.
So it’s so much in our heads, in our discretion,
that we cannot even think of such a thing.
Simple thing that Mooladhara must be cleaned
and washed.
Any Indian, you take it, he knows that is,
because they must have had some problems before.
Whether he is in the North, he’s in the
South, East or West – ask him.
Auspiciousness is another thing.
It’s so much imbibed in the tradition.
But if you have a tradition, say, of doing
things which are absurd – also you can have
traditions like that.
Like very primitive people have all kinds
of traditions which are very absurd.
I was told that if you go to Ladakh what they
do, somebody dies, they keep the hand of the
dead person in the house all the time like
that.
They think that that helps.
But with tradition which is wrong by discarding
that, they will understand that is wrong.
So the more traditional you are, the ancient
you are, you learn many things.
Like we have seen English are, in a way, very
traditional, so they – supposing theirs
a lady coming down and you are coming with
the lady, then the man will be in front – automatically.
He’ll just move.
But if she’s going up, then man will follow
her.
Just happens, automatically, because traditionally
they have learned that if you’re going down,
the lady may fall or something, so we should
be in front.
So what you call as the traditional habits
of person gives you this Hamsa.
And these habits are built better and better
with trial and error methods.
And that’s how you develop it.
Now for people who are Sahaj Yogis, it’s
much easy to imbibe them, because if you see
something, “Yes, that’s wrong – should
not do it – finished."
But you should be so clear cut about it as
you determine.
It works out.
You’re Hamsa will be all right.
But you tell them ten times, still they do
the same thing.
Then that means their Hamsa is not willing
to accept.
But you must nourish it, you must look after
it, you must – as I said also this kajal
is also very good for Hamsa Chakra.
All kajal and the oil in the nose, ears – it’s
very good.
All acts for that.
Even, say, talking to another person, to talk
discretely is to say something which doesn’t
lose its power of affecting that person.
Like if you say something very harsh, then
you should know how to neutralize it so that
he retains that into himself.
All these discretions only come also by tradition.
When you find something that is futile, in
a collective way in a tradition drops out.
So the blessings of the tradition is great,
but greater are the blessings of your Spirit.
And the blessings of the Spirit are such that
through your vibrations, immediately you know
this is wrong.
But you have to be honest about it and you
just give up.
You want to ascend, you want to improve your
vibrations, so for that whatever is needed
you
will do.